I recently was asked to share my thoughts on how to know when a QA team is doing a good job, so I assembled my high-level philosophy on QA and shared it.  Since I'd never done so in one place before, I decided I should clean it up a little and put it somewhere to share it.  Here it is.

-----

I'd be happy to help answer this question, but to do so I'll need to explain a bit what the purpose of QA is.  At a high level, it's this:

**Quality Assurance helps organizations build products and processes with confidence by identifying and mitigating risks.**

There's a lot to unpack here.

## Quality Assurance

Quality assurance is a *practice*, not a role; typically people whose focus is quality assurance are some kind of engineer, but you can have quality assurance analysts who focus on understanding and decomposing processes and products, or UX quality assurance experts who focus on good user experiences and design, or have any number of other specialties that can be used to advocate for quality.  "Quality" itself is a mindset that team members from any background can possess, and indeed one of the things that a good QA team will do is help to foster that mindset among their peers in other disciplines.

## helps

I firmly do not believe that a QA team is a gatekeeper for products, and I'm not comfortable with QA as an arbiter of the "readiness" of a product; QA teams, as we'll cover below, are guides for the product team in deciding, collectively, whether a set of work meets the expectations that the product team and other stakeholders have laid out, as well as whether it meets the larger organization's longer term intentions.  Frequently this can look like QA team members pointing out the flaws in processes and plans, and it's a sign of maturity in your quality assurance team that they can both explain the consequences of those flaws - if the rest of the team will listen - and tie your company's and your organization's long term goals into their feedback.  While it's true that sacrificing long term goals for short term goals (or indeed not really having well-defined long term goals) can be a valid position for an organization or company to be in, anyone on your team that regards QA members serving in this capacity as them being a "wet blanket" is someone that doesn't have the long term viability of your product and organization in mind.  To put it glibly, your QA team is there to make sure you ~~don't embarass yourselves~~ are leaving your customers with only positive surprises.

Expanding a little bit on the previous point, while your QA team owns the quality of your products (and processes), they don't own (all of) the quality *activities* that can be done for a product.  Those are shared by the larger team, with your QA team helping the team to make the best choices about which to invest time in and which people and resources should perform which activity.  I'm a proponent of the ["Quality Assistance"](https://www.atlassian.com/inside-atlassian/qa) model that the QA team at Atlassian developed a while back, which frames product quality as a team sport, with QA members acting as domain experts, advocates, mentors, and only sometimes testers.  Testing, including automated testing, is only one tool in the quality toolbox.

## organizations

There are few, if any, aspects of product creation that a QA team can't help with, and few teams within a company that they can't provide benefit to.  Certainly the sweet spot for QA involvement with is the entire SDLC and all of its direct stakeholders, from ideation through maintenance, and a well functioning QA team will be giving feedback about processes and tools as much as they do products and changes.  That said, with adequate resources a QA team can have an impact on more of the company than just the product and development organization.  While they can and should help keep their immediate peer teams oriented toward longer term and larger scale goals, as I mentioned above, a well-resourced QA team can also have a positive impact by working with the broader organization - consulting with customer service about issues in the wild, for example, or even having their own technical contacts and relationship with the third parties that provide services that your products may integrate with.

## build products and processes

If you're not producing some kind of work product, odds are good that you're not engaging with QA experts, which is a shame - the more mature your QA team is, the more insight they'll have not only into what about your product isn't meeting expectations, but also what about *how you make it* is preventing you from doing so.  Quality is an aspect of *processes* as much as it is of *products*, and the expertise that QA professionals provide can often find potential improvements in much of how products get made in your company.  Your QA team is there to help the organization do the best job it can, and they'll have the most success with that if they get to have a broader mandate.

## with confidence

This is the heart of it.  A QA team isn't there to make your team make perfect products - QA is a partner and not a drill sergeant; doing so would require perfect knowledge of user desires and technical capabilities; and "perfect" is always going to be a moving target anyway.  QA is there to help the team understand two things as much as possible.  First, QA should help lead the team to understand and document what their goals look like, but in a material, defined way - what measurable conditions need to exist to satisfy the stated purpose of work.  These are typically couched as "acceptance criteria", and the vaguer the team is about defining them, the less confidence there will be that a new product or feature will do what you meant it to.  Second, QA should help you understand the tradeoffs inherent in every decision throughout the SDLC.  This is where a lot of the historical animosity and name calling ("wet blanket") towards QA comes from; this can feel a lot like your team's QA resource complaining about every idea your team has, or inventing problems where none existed.  Neither of these is the truth, which I'll get into more below, but I'll say here that the goal of this feedback is to ensure that the team has as much information as possible to weigh in making decisions, even (and especially) difficult or spicy ones - the better the understanding, the greater the confidence, and ideally the lower the risk.  As understanding grows and is documented, the information the team has will grow, as will their ability to make reasoned, conscious, confident product decisions.

Important side note here: A confident team is not a team that never makes bad decisions.  A confident team makes the best decisions it can and is as prepared as it can be to be wrong.  Confident teams do fail, but they actively learn from failure, and rarely fail the same way twice.

## by identifying and mitigating risks

If the product team is a machine, and confidence is the output that QA gets from that machine, the inputs are the discovery, contextualization, communication, and mitigation of risks.  Every tool in the QA toolbox, from testing on, is ultimately about better understanding risk and where it arises.  The earlier in the SDLC that you engage with QA, the farther-reaching (but admittedly possibly vaguer) the risks that can be identified, understood, and discussed as a team.  For example, gathering acceptance criteria from product management and engineers is a tool that identifies risks in the gap between expectations of what a product is wanted to do versus what it's possible for it to do.  Manual and automated testing are tools that reduce the unknowns around the consequences of making changes in a product, as well as the limits of the understanding of your developers about the complexity of your products.  A regular check-in with customer service is a tool for better understanding customer expectations and concerns, which provides better understanding of the risks of changing designs and functionality.  It's impossible to eliminate risk, but it's very possible to reduce the places where risk can hide, and it's also very possible to develop an understanding of risk that lets the team make decisions that will reduce its likelihood or its potential impact, either proactively (by making design or development choices that introduce less risk) or reactively (by developing mitigation plans and tools that enable a team to more quickly and simply respond if something undesired happens - or happens again).

(Also, stagnation introduces its own risks.  If you refuse to make changes because of fear of risk, your technologies, your customers, your company, and your industry - among many other things - will all eventually change around you, and those changes will all push risks onto your products.  There's literally no avoiding risk.)

## So: "How do I know if QA is doing a good job?"

If Quality Assurance helps organizations build products and processes with confidence by identifying and mitigating risks, then we know that QA is doing a good job by gauging the broader team's confidence in their choices and work.  What does a confident development organization look like?

- Confident organizations are able to make decisions with bigger top-line risks, because they have quality processes and mindset in place that can digest those bigger risks into manageable ones.
- Confident organizations are able to make more frequent deployments to customers because typical sprint workloads end up having negligible risk, and because they start letting go of the need to bundle entire sprints' worth of changes together in an effort to make releases "safer" - individual developers can usually release their individual ticket's worth of work as a matter of course.
- Confident organizations aren't afraid to face and discuss risks and negative consequences, because they have faith in their ability to come to the best decisions they can and because, as an organization, they recognize that risk and even failure are part of the process, and not some kind of personal or organizational moral failing.
- Confident organizations aren't afraid of the "boring" work, like documentation or maintenance or bug fixing or addressing technical debt, because they know their confidence is built on activities like this that reduce longer term risk.
- Confident organizations rarely get paged after hours, and when they do, anything short of an application somehow being literally on fire can usually be dealt with pretty quickly by even junior team members consulting a runbook.
- Confident teams habitually, routinely conduct retrospectives and post mortems because they look forward to doing better next time, every time.

Your criteria here don't have to be this vague or subjective; they'll be pretty particular for your team and circumstances, though they'll likely look a lot like this.  All of this, of course, makes the assumption that your QA team is being included and listened to - like I said above, quality is a team sport.  Your QA team are coaches.  It's up to you to listen, if you want to be a winning team.
